Edson Arantes do Nascimento (Brazilian Portuguese: [  ts  (w)     t iz du n si m tu]; born 23 October 1940), known as Pel  (Brazilian Portuguese: [pe  l ]), is a retired Brazilian professional footballer who played as a forward. He is widely regarded as the greatest player of all time. Pel  is also credited with making the phrase "the beautiful game" synonymous with football. In 1999, he was voted World Player of the Century by the International Federation of Football History & Statistics (IFFHS). The same year, France Football asked their former Ballon d'Or winners to choose the Football Player of the Century; they selected Pel . In 1999, Pel  was elected Athlete of the Century by the IOC, and Time named him in their list of 100 most influential people of the 20th century. In 2013 he received the FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'Honneur in recognition of his career and achievements as a global icon of football.
According to the IFFHS, Pel  is the most successful league goal-scorer in the world, with 541 league goals. In total, Pel  scored 1281 goals in 1363 games, including unofficial friendlies and tour games, for which he was listed in the Guinness World Records for most career goals scored in football. During his playing days, Pel  was for a period the best-paid athlete in the world. In his native Brazil, he is hailed as a national hero for his accomplishments in football and for his vocal support of policies to improve the social conditions of the poor. In 1961, Brazil President J nio Quadros had Pel  declared a national treasure. During his career, he became known as "The Black Pearl" (A P rola Negra), "The King of Football" (O Rei do Futebol), "The King Pel " (O Rei Pel ) or simply "The King" (O Rei).
Pel  began playing for Santos at 15 and the Brazil national football team at 16. He won three FIFA World Cups: 1958, 1962 and 1970, the only player ever to do so; and is the all-time leading goalscorer for Brazil with 77 goals in 91 games. At club level he is also the record goalscorer for Santos, and led them to the 1962 and 1963 Copa Libertadores. Pel 's "electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals" made him a star around the world, and his club team Santos toured internationally in order to take full advantage of his popularity. Since retiring in 1977, Pel  has been a worldwide ambassador for football and has undertaken various acting roles and commercial ventures. In 2010, he was named the Honorary President of the New York Cosmos.


== Early years ==

Pel  was born in Tr s Cora  es, Minas Gerais, Brazil, the son of Fluminense footballer Dondinho (born Jo o Ramos do Nascimento) and Celeste Arantes. He was the elder of two siblings. He was named after the American inventor Thomas Edison. His parents decided to remove the "i" and call him "Edson", but there was a mistake on the birth certificate, leading many documents to show his name as "Edison", not "Edson", as he is called. He was originally nicknamed Dico by his family. He received the nickname "Pel " during his school days, when it is claimed he was given it because of his pronunciation of the name of his favorite player, local Vasco da Gama goalkeeper Bil , which he misspoke but the more he complained the more it stuck. In his autobiography, Pel  stated he had no idea what the name means, nor did his old friends. Apart from the assertion that the name is derived from that of Bil , and that it is Hebrew for "miracle", the word has no known meaning in Portuguese.
Pel  grew up in poverty in Bauru in the state of S o Paulo. He earned extra money by working in tea shops as a servant. Taught to play by his father, he could not afford a proper football and usually played with either a sock stuffed with newspaper and tied with a string or a grapefruit. He played for several amateur teams in his youth, including Sete de Setembro, Canto do Rio, S o Paulinho, and Am riquinha. Pel  led Bauru Athletic Club juniors (coached by Waldemar de Brito) to three consecutive S o Paulo state youth championships between 1954 and 1956. He also dominated Futebol de Sal o (indoor football) competitions in the region and won several championships with local team Radium.


== Club career ==


=== Santos ===
In 1956, de Brito took Pel  to Santos, an industrial and port city located near S o Paulo, to try out for professional club Santos FC, telling the directors at Santos that the 15-year-old would be "the greatest football player in the world." Pel  impressed Santos coach Lula during his trial at the Est dio Vila Belmiro, and he signed a professional contract with the club in June 1956. Pel  was highly promoted in the local media as a future superstar. He made his senior team debut on 7 September 1956 at the age of 15 against Corinthians Santo Andre and had an impressive performance in a 7 1 victory, scoring the first of his record 1281 goals in football during the match.
When the 1957 season started, Pel  was given a starting place in the first team and, at the age of 16, became the top scorer in the league. Ten months after signing professionally, the teenager was called up to the Brazil national team. After the 1962 World Cup, wealthy European clubs such as Real Madrid, Juventus and Manchester United tried to sign him, but the government of Brazil declared Pel  an "official national treasure" to prevent him from being transferred out of the country.

Pel  won his first major title with Santos in 1958 as the team won the Campeonato Paulista; Pel  would finish the tournament as top scorer with 58 goals, a record that stands today. A year later, he would help the team earn their first victory in the Torneio Rio-S o Paulo with a 3 0 over Vasco da Gama. However, Santos was unable to retain the Paulista title. In 1960, Pel  scored 33 goals to help his team regain the Campeonato Paulista trophy but lost out on the Rio-S o Paulo tournament after finishing in 8th place. Another 47 goals from Pel  saw Santos retain the Campeonato Paulista. The club went on to win the Ta a Brasil that same year, beating Bahia in the finals; Pel  finished as top scorer of the tournament with nine goals. The victory allowed Santos to participate in the Copa Libertadores, the most prestigious club tournament in the Western hemisphere.

Santos's most successful club season started in 1962; the team was seeded in Group One alongside Cerro Porte o and Deportivo Municipal Bolivia, winning every match of their group but one (a 1 1 away tie vs Cerro), with Pel  scoring his first goal against Cerro. Santos defeated Universidad Cat lica in the semifinals and met defending champions Pe arol in the finals in which Pel  scored twice in the playoff match to secure the first title for a Brazilian club. Pel  finished as the second top scorer of the competition with four goals. That same year, Santos would successfully defend the Campeonato Brasileiro (with 37 goals from Pel ) and the Ta a Brasil (Pel  scoring four goals in the final series against Botafogo). Santos would also win the 1962 Intercontinental Cup against Benfica. Wearing his number 10 shirt, Pel  produced one of the best performances of his career, scoring a hat-trick in Lisbon as Santos won 5 2.
As the defending champions, Santos qualified automatically to the semi-final stage of the 1963 Copa Libertadores. The ballet blanco managed to retain the title after victories over Botafogo and Boca Juniors. Pel  helped Santos overcome a Botafogo team that contained Brazilian legends such as Garrincha and Jairzinho with a last-minute goal in the first leg of the semi-finals which made it 1 1. In the second leg, Pel  scored a hat-trick in the Est dio do Maracan  as Santos won, 0 4, in the second leg. Santos started the final series by winning, 3 2, in the first leg and defeating Boca Juniors 1 2, in La Bombonera, with another goal from Pel . Santos became the first (and to date the only) Brazilian team to lift the Copa Libertadores in Argentine soil. Pel  finished the tournament with 5 goals. Santos lost the Campeonato Paulista after finishing in third place but went on to win the Rio-S o Paulo tournament after a 0 3 win over Flamengo in the final, with Pel  scoring one. Pel  would also help Santos retain the Intercontinental Cup and the Ta a Brasil.

In the 1964 Copa Libertadores, Santos were beaten in both legs of the semi-finals by Independiente. The club won the Campeonato Paulista, with Pel  netting 34 goals. Santos also shared the Rio-S o Paulo title with Botafogo and won the Ta a Brasil for the fourth consecutive year. In the 1965 Copa Libertadores, Santos reached the semi-finals and met Pe arol in a rematch of the 1962 final. After two matches, a playoff was needed to break the tie. Unlike 1962, Pe arol came out on top and eliminated Santos 2 1. Pel  would, however, finish as the topscorer of the tournament with eight goals. This proved to be the start of a decline as Santos failed to retain the Torneio Rio-S o Paulo. In 1966, Pel  and Santos also failed to retain the Ta a Brasil as O Rei's goals weren't enough to prevent a 9 4 defeat by Cruzeiro (led by Tost o) in the final series. The club did however win the Campeonato Paulista in 1967, 1968 and 1969. On 19 November 1969, Pel  scored his 1000th goal in all competitions, in what was a highly anticipated moment in Brazil. The goal, popularly dubbed O Mil simo (The Thousandth), occurred in a match against Vasco da Gama, when Pel  scored from a penalty kick, at the Maracan  Stadium.
Pel  states that his most memorable goal was scored at Rua Javari stadium on a Campeonato Paulista match against S o Paulo rival Juventus on 2 August 1959. As there is no video footage of this match, Pel  asked that a computer animation be made of this specific goal. In March 1961, Pel  scored the gol de placa (goal worthy of a plaque), against Fluminense at the Maracan . Pel  received the ball on the edge of his own penalty area, and ran the length of the field, eluding opposition players with feints, before striking the ball beyond the goalkeeper. A plaque was commissioned with a dedication to "the most beautiful goal in the history of the Maracan ".
Pel 's "electrifying play and penchant for spectacular goals" made him a star around the world. His team Santos toured internationally in order to take full advantage of his popularity. In 1967, the two factions involved in the Nigerian Civil War agreed to a 48-hour ceasefire so they could watch Pel  play an exhibition game in Lagos. During his time at Santos, Pel  played alongside many gifted players, including Zito, Pepe, and Coutinho; the latter partnered him in numerous one-two plays, attacks, and goals.


=== New York Cosmos ===

After the 1974 season (his 19th with Santos), Pel  retired from Brazilian club football although he continued to occasionally play for Santos in official competitive matches. Two years later, he came out of semi-retirement to sign with the New York Cosmos of the North American Soccer League (NASL) for the 1975 season. Though well past his prime at this point, Pel  is credited with significantly increasing public awareness and interest of the sport in the United States. Hoping to fuel the same kind of awareness in the Dominican Republic, he and the Cosmos team played in an exhibition match against Haitian team, Violette AC, in the Santo Domingo Olympic Stadium on 3 June 1976, where over 25,000 fans watched him score a winning goal in the last seconds of the match, leading the Cosmos to a 2 1 victory. He led the Cosmos to the 1977 NASL championship, in his third and final season with the club.
On 1 October 1977, Pel  closed out his career in an exhibition match between the Cosmos and Santos. Santos arrived in New York and New Jersey after previously defeating the Seattle Sounders, 2 0. The match was played in front of a sold out crowd at Giants Stadium and was televised in the United States on ABC's Wide World of Sports as well as throughout the world. Pel 's father and wife both attended the match, as well as Muhammad Ali and Bobby Moore. Pel  played the first half for the Cosmos and the second half for Santos. Pel  scored his final goal from a direct free kick, and Cosmos won 2 1.


== International career ==

Pel 's first international match was a 2 1 defeat against Argentina on 7 July 1957 at the Maracan . In that match, he scored his first goal for Brazil aged 16 years and nine months to become the youngest player to score in international football.


=== 1958 World Cup ===

Pel  arrived in Sweden sidelined by a knee injury but on his return from the treatment room, his colleagues closed ranks and insisted upon his selection. His first match was against the USSR in the third match of the first round of the 1958 FIFA World Cup, where he gave the assist to Vav 's second goal. He was the youngest player of that tournament, and at the time the youngest ever to play in the World Cup. He scored his first World Cup goal against Wales in quarter-finals, the only goal of the match, to help Brazil advance to semifinals, while becoming the youngest ever World Cup goalscorer at 17 years and 239 days. Against France in the semifinal, Brazil were leading 2 1 at halftime, and then Pel  scored a hat-trick, becoming the youngest in World Cup history to do so.
On 29 June 1958 Pel  became the youngest player to play in a World Cup final match at 17 years and 249 days. He scored two goals in that final as Brazil beat Sweden 5 2 in the capital of Stockholm. His first goal where he flicked the ball over a defender before volleying into the corner of the net, was selected as one of the best goals in the history of the World Cup. Following Pel 's second goal, Swedish player Sigvard Parling would later comment; "When Pel  scored the fifth goal in that Final, I have to be honest and say I felt like applauding". When the match ended, Pel  passed out on the field, and had to be attended by the medical staff. He then recovered, and was compelled by the victory to weep as he was being congratulated by his teammates. He finished the tournament with six goals in four matches played, tied for second place, behind record-breaker Just Fontaine, and was named best young player of the tournament.
It was in the 1958 World Cup that Pel  began wearing a jersey with number 10. Recently it has become known that the event was the result of disorganization: the leaders did not send the shirt numbers of players and it was up to FIFA to choose the number 10 shirt to Pele who was a substitute on the occasion. The press proclaimed Pel  the greatest revelation of the 1958 World Cup, and he was also retroactively given the Silver Ball as the second best player of the tournament, behind Didi.


=== South American Championship ===
Pel  also played in the South American Championship. In the 1959 competition he was named best player of the tournament and was top scorer with 8 goals, as Brazil came second despite being unbeaten in the tournament.


=== 1962 World Cup ===

This was expected to be Pel 's World Cup, as he was rated as the best player in the world at the time. In the first match of the 1962 World Cup in Chile, against Mexico, Pel  assisted the first goal and then scored the second one, after a run past four defenders, to go up 2 0. He injured himself while attempting a long-range shot against Czechoslovakia. This would keep him out of the rest of the tournament, and forced coach Aymor  Moreira to make his only lineup change of the tournament. The substitute was Amarildo, who performed well for the rest of the tournament. However, it was Garrincha who would take the leading role and carry Brazil to their second World Cup title, after beating Czechoslovakia at the final in the capital of Santiago.


=== 1966 World Cup ===
The 1966 World Cup in England was marked, among other things, for the brutal fouling on Pel , by the Bulgarian and Portuguese defenders. Pel  was the most famous footballer in the world, and Brazil fielded some world champions like Garrincha, Gilmar and Djalma Santos with the addition of other stars like Jairzinho, Tost o and G rson, leading to high expectations for them. Brazil was eliminated in the first round, playing only three matches.
Pel  scored the first goal from a free kick against Bulgaria, becoming the first player to score in three successive FIFA World Cups, but due to his injury, a result of persistent fouling by the Bulgarians, he missed the second game against Hungary. Brazil lost that game and Pel , although still recovering, was brought back for the last crucial match against Portugal at Goodison Park in Liverpool by the Brazilian coach Vicente Feola. Feola changed the entire defense, including the goalkeeper, while in midfield he returned to the formation of the first match. In attack he maintained Jairzinho and substituted the other two players, despite knowing that Pel  was still recovering from his serious injuries. During the game, Portugal defender Jo o Morais brutally fouled Pel , but was not sent off by referee George McCabe, of whom it is acknowledged let "the Portuguese get away with murder". Pel  had to stay on the field limping for the rest of the game, since substitutes were not allowed at that time. After this game he vowed he would never again play in the World Cup, a decision he would later change.


=== 1970 World Cup ===

Pel  was called to the national team in early 1969, he refused at first, but then accepted and played in six World Cup qualifying matches, scoring six goals. The 1970 World Cup in Mexico was to be Pel 's last. Brazil's squad for the tournament featured major changes in relation to the 1966 squad. Players like Garrincha, Nilton Santos, Valdir Pereira, Djalma Santos and Gilmar had already retired, but the team, with Pel , Rivelino, Jairzinho, G rson, Carlos Alberto Torres, Tost o and Clodoaldo, is often considered to be the greatest football team in history.

The front five of Jairzinho, Pel , Gerson, Tost o and Rivelino together created an attacking momentum, with Pel  having a central role in Brazil's way to the final. All of Brazil's matches in the tournament (except the final) were played in Guadalajara, and in the first match against Czechoslovakia, Pel  gave Brazil a 2 1 lead, by controlling Gerson's long pass with his chest and then scoring. In this match Pel  attempted to lob goalkeeper Ivo Viktor from the half-way line, only narrowly missing the Czechoslovak goal. Brazil went on to win the match, 4 1. In the first half of the match against England, Pel  nearly scored with a header that was saved by the England goalkeeper Gordon Banks. In the second half, he controlled a cross from Tost o before flicking the ball to Jairzinho who scored the only goal.
Against Romania in Guadalajara, Pel  scored the first goal with a bending free kick hit with the outside of his right foot. Later in the match he scored again to make it 3 1. Brazil won by a final score of 3 2. In the quarterfinals against Peru, Brazil won 4 2, with Pel  assisting Tost o for Brazil's third goal. In their semi-final match, Brazil faced Uruguay for the first time since the 1950 World Cup final round match. Jairzinho put Brazil ahead 2 1, and Pel  assisted Rivelino for the 3 1. During that match, Pel  made one of his most famous plays. Tost o passed the ball for Pel  to collect which Uruguay's goalkeeper Ladislao Mazurkiewicz took notice of and ran off his line to get the ball before Pel . However, Pel  got there first and fooled Mazurkiewicz with a feint by not touching the ball, causing it to roll to the goalkeepers left, while Pel  went to the goalkeepers right. Pel  ran around the goalkeeper to retrieve the ball and took a shot while turning towards the goal, but he turned in excess as he shot, and the ball drifted just wide of the far post.
Brazil played Italy in the final at the Azteca Stadium in Mexico City. Pel  scored the opening goal with a header over Italian defender Tarcisio Burgnich. He then made assists on Brazil's third goal, scored by Jairzinho, and the fourth finished by Carlos Alberto which is often considered the greatest team goal of all time, involving all but two of the team's outfield players, and ended with Pel  making a blind pass which went into the path of Carlos Alberto, who came running from behind, and struck the ball to score. Brazil won the match 4 1, keeping the Jules Rimet Trophy indefinitely, and Pel  received the Golden Ball as player of the tournament. Burgnich, who marked Pel  during the final, was quoted saying "I told myself before the game, he's made of skin and bones just like everyone else   but I was wrong".
Pel 's last international match was on 18 July 1971 against Yugoslavia in Rio de Janeiro. With Pel  on the field, the Brazilian team's record was 67 wins, 14 draws and 11 losses. Brazil never lost a match while fielding both Pel  and Garrincha.


== Reception and legacy ==

Pel  is one of the most lauded players in history and is frequently ranked the best player ever. Among his contemporaries, Dutch star Johan Cruyff stated; "Pel  was the only footballer who surpassed the boundaries of logic." Brazil's 1970 FIFA World Cup-winning captain Carlos Alberto Torres opined; "His great secret was improvisation. Those things he did were in one moment. He had an extraordinary perception of the game." Tost o, his strike partner at the 1970 World Cup; "Pel  was the greatest   he was simply flawless. And off the pitch he is always smiling and upbeat. You never see him bad-tempered. He loves being Pel ." His Brazilian teammate Clodoaldo commented on the adulation he witnessed; "In some countries they wanted to touch him, in some they wanted to kiss him. In others they even kissed the ground he walked on. I thought it was beautiful, just beautiful." Former Real Madrid and Hungary star Ferenc Pusk s stated; "The greatest player in history was Di Stefano. I refuse to classify Pel  as a player. He was above that."
Just Fontaine, French striker and leading scorer at the 1958 World Cup; "When I saw Pel  play, it made me feel I should hang up my boots." England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning captain Bobby Moore commented: "Pel  was the most complete player I've ever seen, he had everything. Two good feet. Magic in the air. Quick. Powerful. Could beat people with skill. Could outrun people. Only five feet and eight inches tall, yet he seemed a giant of an athlete on the pitch. Perfect balance and impossible vision. He was the greatest because he could do anything and everything on a football pitch. I remember Saldhana the coach being asked by a Brazilian journalist who was the best goalkeeper in his squad. He said Pel . The man could play in any position". Former Manchester United striker and member of England's 1966 FIFA World Cup-winning team Sir Bobby Charlton stated; "I sometimes feel as though football was invented for this magical player." During the 1970 World Cup, a British television commentator asked; "How do you spell Pel ?", with the response; "Easy: G-O-D."

Since retiring, Pel  has continued to be lauded by players, coaches, journalists and others. Brazilian attacking midfielder Zico, who represented Brazil at the 1978, 1982 and 1986 FIFA World Cup, stated; "This debate about the player of the century is absurd. There's only one possible answer: Pel . He's the greatest player of all time, and by some distance I might add". French three time Balon D'or winner Michel Platini said; "There's Pel  the man, and then Pel  the player. And to play like Pel  is to play like God." Joint FIFA Player of the Century, Argentina's 1986 FIFA World Cup-winning captain Diego Maradona stated; "It's too bad we never got along, but he was an awesome player". Prolific Brazilian striker Rom rio, winner of the 1994 FIFA World Cup and player of the tournament; "It's only inevitable I look up to Pel . He's like a God to us". Two-time FIFA Ballon d'Or winner Cristiano Ronaldo said: "Pel  is the greatest player in football history, and there will only be one Pel ", while Jos  Mourinho, two-time UEFA Champions League winning manager, commented; "I think he is football. You have the real special one   Mr Pel ." Real Madrid honorary president and former player, Alfredo Di St fano, opined; "The best player ever? Pel . Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo are both great players with specific qualities, but Pel  was better".
Presenting Pel  a lifetime achievement award, former South African president Nelson Mandela said; "To watch him play was to watch the delight of a child combined with the extraordinary grace of a man in full." US statesman and political scientist Henry Kissinger stated, "Performance at a high level in any sport is to exceed the ordinary human scale. But Pel 's performance transcended that of the ordinary star by as much as the star exceeds ordinary performance." Former Brazilian ambassador to the United Nations, J.B. Pinheiro, commented; "Pel  played football for 22 years, and in that time he did more to promote world friendship and fraternity than any other ambassador anywhere." With crowds flocking wherever he goes, a reporter asked if his fame compared to that of Jesus, Pel  in response quipped, "There are parts of the world where Jesus Christ is not so well known."
Pel  has also been remembered in popular culture. For example, from 1977 to 1982, Pel  had a character based on him published as a Monica's Gang related work. The character was named "Pelezinho" (lit. "Little Pel ") and was conceived during conversations between Pel  himself and Mauricio de Sousa, the Gang's creator. Pel  also suggested the minor characters, based on his childhood memories. Pel  was also painted by Andy Warhol as part of Warhol's Athletes Series. The country of North Korea also remembered Pel  by issuing a postage stamp depicting him. Professional wrestler AJ Styles has been known to name his backflip head-kick "The Pel ". In 1980, Pel  endorsed the Atari game Pel 's Soccer.
There is however also criticism with regard to Pel 's achievements. Telegraph journalist Jonathan Lieuw for instance criticized his achievements by stating that his role in the World Cups is vastly overrated. For example: 'His [Pel ] World Cup record, while impressive, is susceptible to overstatement. Injury in 1962 means that effectively, he only really won two World Cups, and was not the outstanding player either time. In 1958, it was Didi who was voted player of the tournament, while in 1970, it was very much a team effort, with the likes of Tostao and Jairzinho at least as important.'  Lieuw goes on the argue that also his record with regard to goal scoring is exaggerated: 'But even as you list Pele s achievements, it is possible to pick holes in them. Ali Daei of Iran is international football s leading goalscorer, with 109 goals in 149 caps. This does not make him the greatest player of all time. Hundreds of Pele s goals came in friendlies, against up-country teams or down-at-heel invitational sides. Pele scored against the very best, but he scored against the very worst too.' In conclusion Lieuw argued: 'We are told Pele is the best but his record is overstated - he is a master of self-promotion and circumstance helped him achieve pre-eminence.'
Also former Brazil coach Luiz Felipe Scolari criticized Pel  by stating:  I believe that Pele knows nothing about football. He has done nothing as a coach and all his analysis always turns out to be wrong. He s an idol in all of Brazil, but his analysis is worth nothing. If you want to win a title, you have to listen to Pele and then do the opposite  


== Personal life ==

On 21 February 1966, Pel  married Rosemeri dos Reis Cholbi; they have two daughters, Kelly Cristina (born 13 January 1967), who married Dr. Arthur DeLuca, and Jennifer (b. 1978), as well as a son, Edson ("Edinho", b. 27 August 1970). The couple divorced in 1982. In 1977, Brazilian media reported that Pel  had his right kidney removed. From 1981 to 1986, Pel  was romantically linked with the model Xuxa, and was seen as influential in launching her career; she was 17 when they started to date. In April 1994 Pel  married psychologist and gospel singer Ass ria Lemos Seixas, who gave birth on 28 September 1996 to twins Joshua and Celeste through fertility treatments. The couple divorced in 2008. Pel  had at least two more children from former affairs. Sandra Machado, his daughter with a housemaid Anizia Machado in 1964, for years fought to be acknowledged by Pel , who refused to submit to DNA tests. Although she was recognized by courts as his daughter based on DNA evidence in 1993, Pel  never acknowledged his eldest daughter even after her death in 2006, nor her two children, Octavio and Gabriel. Pel  had had another daughter, Fl via Kurtz, in an extramarital affair in 1968 with journalist Lenita Kurtz. Fl via was recognized by him as his daughter.
At the age of 73, Pel  announced his intention to marry 41-year-old Marcia Aoki, a Japanese-Brazilian importer of medical equipment from Pen polis, S o Paulo, whom he has been dating since 2010. They first met in the mid-1980s in New York, before meeting again in 2008. Pel  is now married to Marcia Aoki who stood by him during his illness in 2014.
In 1970, Pel  was investigated by the Brazilian military dictatorship for suspected leftist sympathies. Declassified documents show Pel  was investigated after being handed a manifesto calling for the release of political prisoners. Pel  himself did not get further involved within political struggles in the country. He has been criticized in the public opinion for his conservative views. In June 2013, during the Brazilian protests, he asked for people to "forget the demonstrations" and support the Brazil national team. In November 2012, Pel  underwent a successful hip operation. In May 2014, his son Edinho was jailed for 33 years for laundering money from drug trafficking. Pel  has stated that he is a Catholic.


== After Football ==

In 1995, Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso appointed Pel  to the position of Extraordinary Minister for Sport, and he was also appointed a UNESCO Goodwill Ambassador. During this time he proposed legislation to reduce corruption in Brazilian football, which became known as the "Pel  law." Pel  left his position in 2001 after he was accused of involvement in a corruption scandal, although nothing was proven, and it was denied by UNICEF. In 1997, he received an honorary knighthood from Queen Elizabeth II at a ceremony in Buckingham Palace. Pel  also helped inaugurate the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals, alongside supermodel Claudia Schiffer.

Pel  publicly accused the Brazilian football administrator Ricardo Teixeira of corruption after Pel 's television company was rejected in a contest for the Brazilian domestic rights to the 1994 World Cup. Pel  accusations led to an eight-year feud between the pair. As a consequence of the affair, the President of FIFA, Jo o Havelange banned Pel  from the draw for the 1994 FIFA World Cup in Las Vegas. Criticisms over the ban were perceived to have negatively affected Havelange's chances of re-election as FIFA's president in 1994.
Pel  has published several autobiographies, starred in documentary films, and composed musical pieces, including the soundtrack for the film Pel  in 1977. He appeared, alongside other footballers of the 1960s and 1970s, with Michael Caine, and Sylvester Stallone, in the 1981 film Escape to Victory, about a World War II-era football match between Allied prisoners of war and a German team. in 1969, Pel  starred in a telenovela called Os Estranhos, about first contact with aliens. It was created to drum up interest in the Apollo missions. In 2001, had a cameo role in the satire film, Mike Bassett: England Manager. In 2009, he cooperated with Ubisoft on arcade football game Academy of Champions: Soccer for the Wii and appeared in the game as a coach to its players. On FIFA 14, Pel  plays for the Ultimate team known as Legends for the Xbox One, where game-players can acquire classic players from different eras.

In November 2007, Pel  was in Sheffield, England to mark the 150th anniversary of the world's oldest football club, Sheffield F.C.. Pel  was the guest of honour at Sheffield's anniversary match against Inter Milan, which Inter won 5 2 at Bramall Lane. As part of his visit, Pel  opened an exhibition which included the first public showing in 40 years of the original hand-written rules of football. Pel  scouted for Premier League club Fulham in 2002. He made the draw for the qualification groups for the 2006 FIFA World Cup finals. On 1 August 2010, Pel  was introduced as the Honorary President of a revived New York Cosmos, aiming to field a team in Major League Soccer On 3 August 2011, it was reported that Santos were considering bringing him out of retirement for a cameo role in the 2011 FIFA Club World Cup, although this later turned out to be false.
The most notable area of Pel 's life since football is his ambassadorial work. In 1992, he was appointed a UN ambassador for ecology and the environment. He was also awarded Brazil's Gold Medal for outstanding services to the sport in 1995. In 2012, Pel  was awarded an honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh for "significant contribution to humanitarian and environmental causes, as well as his sporting achievements".
On 12 August 2012, Pel  was an attendee at the 2012 Olympic hunger summit hosted by UK Prime Minister David Cameron at 10 Downing Street, London, part of a series of international efforts which have sought to respond to the return of hunger as a high profile global issue. Later on the same day, Pel  appeared at the closing ceremony of the 2012 Summer Olympics in London, following the handover section to the next host city for the 2016 Summer Olympics, Rio de Janeiro.
In March 2016 Pel  filed a lawsuit against Samsung Electronics in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois seeking $30 million in damages claiming violations under the Lanham Act for false endorsement and a state law claim for violation of his right of publicity. The suit alleges, that at one point Samsung and Pel  came close to entering into a licensing agreement for Pel  to appear in a Samsung advertising campaign. Samsung abruptly pulled out of the negotiations. The October 2015 Samsung ad in question, includes a partial face shot of a man who allegedly "very closely resembles" Pel  and also a superimposed high-definition television screen next to the image of the man featuring a "modified bicycle or scissors-kick", perfected and famously used by Pel .


== Honours ==


=== Country ===
Brazil
FIFA World Cup (3): 1958, 1962, 1970
Roca Cup (2): 1957, 1963
Cruz Cup (3): 1958, 1962, 1968
Bernardo O'Higgins Cup (1): 1959
Atlantic Cup (1): 1960
Oswaldo Cruz Cup (3): 1958, 1962, 1968


=== Club ===
Santos
Copa Libertadores (2): 1962, 1963
Intercontinental Cup (2): 1962, 1963
Intercontinental Supercup (1): 1968
Supercopa de Campeones Intercontinentales (1): 1968
Campeonato Brasileiro S rie A (6): 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1968
Torneio Rio-S o Paulo (4): 1959, 1963, 1964, 1966
Campeonato Paulista (10): 1958, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1964, 1965, 1967, 1968, 1969, 1973
New York Cosmos
North American Soccer League, Soccer Bowl (1): 1977
North American Soccer League, Atlantic Conference Championship (1): 1977


=== Individual ===
Santos
Copa Libertadores Top Scorer (1): 1965
Campeonato Brasileiro S rie A Top Scorer (3): 1961, 1963, 1964
Campeonato Paulista Top Scorer (11): 1957, 1958, 1959, 1960, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1969, 1973
Torneio Rio-S o Paulo Top Scorer (1): 1963.
Bola de Prata: 1970

Brazil
FIFA World Cup Best Young Player (1): 1958
FIFA World Cup Golden Ball (Best Player) (1): 1970
FIFA World Cup Silver Ball (1): 1958
FIFA World Cup Silver Boot (1): 1958
FIFA World Cup All-Star Team (2): 1958, 1970
FIFA World Cup All-Time Team: 1994
FIFA World Cup Dream Team: 2002
Copa America Best Player (1): 1959
Copa Am rica Top Scorer (1): 1959

FIFA Ballon d'Or Prix d'Honneur: 2013.
FIFA Player of the Century: 2000
FIFA Order of Merit: 1984
FIFA Centennial Award: 2004
BBC Sports Personality of the Year Overseas Personality: 1970
BBC Sports Personality of the Year Lifetime Achievement Award: 2005
Greatest football player to have ever played the game, by Golden Foot: 2012
Athlete of the Century, by Reuters News Agency: 1999
Athlete of the Century, elected by International Olympic Committee: 1999
Athlete of the Century, elected by worldwide journalists, poll by French daily L'Equipe: 1981
South American Footballer of the Year (1): 1973
Silver ball South American Footballer of the Year (1): 1972
South America Football Player of the Century, by IFFHS International Federation of Football History and Statistics: 1999
Football Player of the Century, by IFFHS International Federation of Football History and Statistics: 1999
Football Player of the Century, elected by France Football's Ballon d'Or Winners: 1999
UNICEF Football Player of the Century: 1999
Inducted into the American National Soccer Hall of Fame: 1993
Laureus World Sports Awards Lifetime Achievement Award from South African President Nelson Mandela: 2000
World Team of the 20th Century: 1998
World Soccer World XI (7): 1960, 1961, 1962, 1963, 1964, 1965, 1966
World Soccer The Greatest Players of the 20th century: 1999
World Soccer Greatest XI of all time: 2013
L' quipe's top 50 South-American footballers in history: #1
Honorary degree from the University of Edinburgh celebrating Pel 's "significant contribution to humanitarian and environmental causes, as well as his sporting achievements": 2012
Prize from the French Academy of Sports, Award given to a player of a team sport for the very first time: 1971
Red Medal of Paris, Given by the City Hall of the French Capital: 1971
TIME One of the 100 Most Important People of the 20th century: 1999
DPR Korea issued a postage stamp depicting Pel : 1989
FIFA World Cup's top 100 footballers of all time, by The Guardian: #1
FIFA 100 Greatest Living Footballers: 2004
Brazilian Football Museum Hall of Fame
In December 2000, Pel  and Maradona shared the prize of FIFA Player of the Century by FIFA. The award was originally intended to be based upon votes in a web poll, but after it became apparent that it favoured Diego Maradona, many observers complained that the Internet nature of the poll would have meant a skewed demographic of younger fans who would have seen Maradona play, but not Pel . FIFA then appointed a "Family of Football" committee of FIFA members to decide the winner of the award together with the votes of the readers of the FIFA Magazine. The committee chose Pel . Since Maradona was winning the Internet poll, however, it was decided he and Pel  should share the award.


=== Orders ===
Knight of the Order of Rio Branco: 1967
Commander of the Order of Rio Branco: 1969
Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary: 1994
Knight Commander of the Order of the British Empire: 1997


== Personal records ==
Brazil national football team All-Time Leading Scorer, 77 goals.
Intercontinental Cup: All-Time Leading Scorer: 7 goals
World record number of hat-trick: 92
International Federation of Football History and Statistics (IFFHS): World s most successful Top Division Goal Scorer: 541 goals.
Guinness World Records: Most career goals (football): 1283 goals in 1363 games
Guinness World Records: Most FIFA World Cup Winners' Medals
Youngest scorer in the FIFA World Cup: 17 years and 239 days (Brazil v Wales 1958)
Youngest hat-trick in the FIFA World Cup: 17 years and 244 days (Brazil v France 1958)
Youngest player to play in a FIFA World Cup final match: 17 years and 249 days (Brazil v Sweden 1958)
Youngest scorer in the FIFA World Cup final match: 17 years and 249 days (Brazil v Sweden 1958)
Youngest winner of a FIFA World Cup: 17 years in 1958 FIFA World Cup


== Career statistics ==


=== Club ===

Pel 's goalscoring record is often reported by FIFA among others as being 1281 goals in 1363 games. Some sources, however, claim that Pel  scored 1282 goals in 1366 games. This figure includes goals scored by Pel  in friendly club matches, for example, international tours Pel  completed with Santos and the New York Cosmos, and a few games Pel  played in for armed forces teams during his national service in Brazil.
The tables below record every goal Pel  scored in major club competitions for Santos and the New York Cosmos. During much of Pel 's playing career in Brazil there was no national league championship. From 1960 onwards the Brazilian Football Confederation (CBF) were required to provide meritocratic entrants for the then-new Copa Libertadores, a South American international club competition broadly equivalent to the European Cup. To enable them to do this, the CBF organised two national competitions: the Ta a de Prata and Ta a Brasil. A national league championship, the Campeonato Brasileiro, was first played in 1971, alongside traditional state and interstate competitions such as the Campeonato Paulista and the Torneio Rio-S o Paulo.
The number of league goals scored by Pel  for Santos and New York Cosmos is listed as 656 in 702 games, which is a world record for League competitions. This number is the sum of the goals scored by Pel  in domestic league-based competitions: the Campeonato Paulista (SPS), Torneio Rio-S o Paulo (RSPS), Ta a de Prata and Campeonato Brasileiro. The Ta a Brasil was a national competition organised on a knockout basis.


=== National team ===

Pel  is the top scorer of the Brazil national football team with 77 goals in 91 official appearances. In addition, he has scored 18 times in 22 unofficial games. This makes an unofficial total of 113 games and 95 goals. He has also scored 12 goals and is credited with 10 assists in 14 World Cup appearances, including 4 goals and 7 assists in 1970. Pel  shares with Uwe Seeler and Miroslav Klose the achievement of being the only three footballers to have scored in four separate World Cup tournaments.


=== Summary ===
Pel  numbers differ between sources mostly due to friendly games. The RSSSF states that Pel  scored 767 goals in 831 official games, 1281 goals in 1365 overall while he was active, 1284 in 1375 taking into account benefit games after retirement. The following table is a compendium of sources that include Santos and FIFA among others.


== See also ==

The Beautiful Game


== References ==


== External links ==
Official website
Pel    FIFA competition record
Pel  at National Soccer Hall of Fame
Pel : A Legend Looks Back   slideshow by Life magazine
List of Goals for Brazil
Pel  at the Internet Movie Database
Details of Pel 's international tours for Santos and Cosmos
American Soccer History Archives - click on a year and then scroll down to the bottom of the page to see friendly tournaments
Play Soccer with Pele
Pel  at Santos official website
Pel  at International Football Hall of Fame
Pel  at Planet World Cup